hi my name is Susan Palmer and I would
like to help you learn how to play the
guitar this lesson covers pages 97
through 120 in the guitar lesson
companion if you don't already own the
copy you can pick one up today at lead
cap press comm you might find it
beneficial to first complete lessons one
through three before attempting this
lesson there are hundreds of chords that
you can play in open position I want to
teach you just the first 15 that will
enable you to play thousands of songs so
let's get started on those I want you to
turn the page 98 in your book and I've
got 4 chord diagrams up here we're just
going to go over the first two Imai nur
and a7 now the lowercase M stands for
minor and that number seven stands for a
dominant seventh chord I don't want to
get into all the theory right now we
will get to that later on I just want to
teach you how to read these and how to
play from one chord to the next
now these vertical ones represent the
strings the horizontal lines show you
where the frets are the open science
here tell you to play open strings and
the encircled numbers tell you which
fingers to place on those frets so I'm
going to start by playing that a minor
chord I've got my first finger on the
second fret of the fifth string and my
second finger on the second fret of the
fourth string here's what the E minor
chord will sound like
if I articulate each note at a time I
get this sound
and I'd like you to practice them that
way just to know that you are getting a
good clear sound out of each one of
those notes if you get a muffled sound
on any of those be sure to press your
hand down a little bit harder directly
behind those metal frets also make sure
that you're using your fingertips and
that no other part of your hand is
touching those other strings one more
time there's your imai Knar chord now on
the a7 chord you'll see this X over the
low E string here your low sixth string
that means do not play that note here's
what the a7 chord will sound like and if
I articulate one note at a time
so one more time I have a minor and a
seven so I want you to be able to play
those chords clearly and have those note
names or those coordinates memorized
before moving on to this next step here
the next step are the chord changing
exercises and I'm going to complete the
first one with you so you get the hang
of how that works now first I'm going to
move my metronome up to 84 beats per
minute this is my target tempo and you
can see I've got a whole note over that
Imai nor chord and I've got another
whole note with that a7 chord now I'm
going to play that E minor chord right
on beat one then I'm gonna pick up my
fingers for the remaining three beats
and get them in position so they're
ready to hit that a7 chord on the next
beat one
let me demonstrate that for you go on
two three four one two three four
or three or one
three or so I'm taking advantage of
those three extra beats to get my hand
in position now the next exercise I'm
scooting my metronome down to 72 beats
per minute and I'm playing two half
notes on a minor and then two half notes
on a seventh this one will be a little
bit trickier and again if 72 is too fast
for you slow that tempo down you're
working up to 72 beats per minute here's
what letter B will sound like one two
three
that's a little more challenging next
we're going to move over to letter C I'm
scooting my metronome down to 60 beats
per minute and I'm going to play four
quarter notes on the E minor and then
four quarter notes on a seven once again
this is my target tempo one two three
letter D continues with quarter notes
Britt's a quicker change I have two
gates on a minor and the two beats on a
seven here's letter D
so it's crucial that you use your
metronome when you're practicing these
exercises your metronome is timing you
and helping you get to your changes a
little bit faster each practice session
I want you to complete all of these
chord changing exercises because they
will enable you to play the blues in the
key of a I've got a whole note exercise
half note exercise and quarter note
exercise you can use the CD track when
you're ready and before you're ready use
your metronome
to work up to about 80 beats per minute
for each one of these on page 100 I'm
introducing tablature to you tablature
is a notation system designed
specifically for the guitar each one of
these lines represents a string these
are your high strings or your strings
that are high in pitch these are your
low strings or the notes the strings
that are low in pitch the numbers tell
you which fret to play they don't tell
you what finger to use but they do tell
you which fret to play and a zero means
that you're not going to play in any
fret it'll be an open string to find the
rhythm that you're to play you have to
look up here to the standard music
notation and we've got eighth notes up
here so we'll count that one and two and
three and four in I want to demonstrate
this by playing it with the CD so you
get the total feel for it one two three
four
and it continues on and on see you get
lots of rehearsing with that on page 101
I have a solo for you this is just a
suggested solo just something to get you
started and it's written in tablature
you're going to need to look up here to
know how long to hold out these notes
and up here I have all the notes that
you'll be playing in this solo
this is an a minor pentatonic scale it's
played on the fifth fret or fifth
position and I'm going to run through
that scale for you right now
it'll look and sound like this
so reads pretty much the same as a chord
diagram except in a scale diagram you're
going to be playing just one note at a
time so you've got a CD track for that
too so I think you have enough
information here to make it through the
rest of those pages you first learn the
chords then practice the score changing
exercises then have fun playing the
chord jams now along with the chord jams
I also have a sample scale here so if
you feel like taking a solo over it you
can
you've got the jam track there for each
one of the chord jams
I've also have some suggested rhythms
and so I want you to have fun on playing
through some of those now all of these
chord jams are taken for real songs
they're very popular chord jams so
they'll definitely be preparing you to
play some music which is really what
it's all about so I want you to work
hard have fun and thanks